---
layout: post
title: "PLO1 Thou shalt be nice"
author: "Sim"
categories: plos
tags: [plos]
image: one.jpg
---

## PLO1

> Draw upon knowledge of professional ethics, the rights of Indigenous peoples, and principles of equity, diversity, and inclusion to guide practice

Two projects are representative of my work drawing on the guidelines developed by folks who have been thinking and advocating for human-centered practice for many years. The first is an intellectual freedom course scenario where we relied heavily on CFLA and provincial guidelines, and Indigenous activism. The second is a course project in which we developed guidelines for how memory institutions can work with material surrounding MMIWG2S+ considering the rights of Indigenous Peoples and DEI work.

For the first project I worked with two other students on developing a response to material challenge at a small-town Canadian school library by a local Indigenous parent. The hypothetical parent challenged four “classic” children’s novels of American experience that are racist (both the characters and the authors). We worked together to read through the policy documents of the school in question, as well as the recommendations of the CFLA and Manitoba equivalent. We also felt it was important to read activist scholarship by Indigenous advocates and allies, to inform a response that balanced intellectual freedom and cultural safety, and how the two were in conversation with each other. We created a rubric to judge the merits of each book in its entirety, independently (of the others). Playing the role of school librarian, we had to create recommendations on how to deal with the media, how the school would communicate with parents and students, and bring together the relevant documentation for the school board to keep on top of the challenge development.

Reading reviews on the books in question and the surrounding literature on racism challenges and equity-informed weeding, I learnt how fiction plays a significant role in how children develop a sense of themselves and others. I had to think critically about the tradition of intellectual freedom based on a white middle class reading culture, that worked to reproduce its own values. Perhaps the most important take away for practice was thinking about a work ‘as a whole,’ and how that is the standard for considering harm, rather than instances of racism.

We went back and forth on our approach, but ultimately chose to keep three books, and remove one from the school collection, as the Euro-American author of the final book posed inauthentically as an Indigenous writer. Many questions remained after this project was presented and submitted, and I was left with a sense that the rigorous priorities of intellectual freedom may need to be softened in certain contexts if we want to open the library to all people.

<object data="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdfs/school-challenge.pdf" width="500" height="700" type='application/pdf'></object>
*Copyright GF, CW, & SF*

For the second project, we created a series of questions institutions could ask themselves on the lifecycle of material held relating to MMIWG2S+ and developing relationships with these people, their families, and communities. This was based on a survey of existing scholarly literature and projects on this topic.

<object data="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdfs/mmiwg.pdf" width="500" height="700" type='application/pdf'></object>
*Copyright RBL, JD, RH, & SF*