---
layout: post
title: "PLO3 Thou shalt organize chaos so others may actually find things"
author: "Sim"
categories: plos
tags: [plos]
image: arctic-2.jpg
---

## PLO3

> Organize and manage information to facilitate access, reflection, and use in a range of contexts

For the third program learning outcome, I’ve chosen three of my favourite projects to date, that have helped me develop a sense of what I want to continue doing!

3.1

For the **MRCP**, our supervisor, two other students, and I chatted with the Musqueam Indian Band Archives, and learnt they valued having information on their community members that were portrayed in resources UBC held. We agreed, and I was delegated to add columns for this and two others new metadata elements. In addition to hiding vestigial columns, which we didn’t want to completely delete as some description had been filled by former students, I added a README sheet, so our work could be comprehensible to future team members.

My colleagues and I then proceeded to read UBC-held material potentially on Musqueam and write focused reviews on how the material portrayed the community. We then discussed our main areas of focus together, then outlined how we would organize our research on each item so that there was consistency across us three researchers. This was an iterative and collaborative cycle to find the best way to organize and manage quite diverse information in a repeatable and customizable way. Our goal was to balance between general access, to interested folks such as UBC student researchers, and the needs of the Musqueam community, all while not fully certain of the way the final portal would look like. Over the course of our four months involvement on the project, we created several iterations of the database, and left clear documentation to ease onboarding new members, and the transfer of knowledge.

Another contribution I made was finding two or three new items that UBC held on Musqueam while doing background research on other items. These items were not properly catalogued in the UBC library system so that they got missed on the initial material scan. This put in evidence the need for complete metadata, as well as the usefulness of human researchers that can pull out material that are missed by machine surveys.

My contributions to the MRCP set me up to reflect critically on institutional information and that host institution’s relationship with a marginalized community, as well as the dynamic of an evolving project with different stakeholders with various understandings and visions of how information could most usefully be organized and managed. I learnt how to engage in critical research and synthesizing findings into concise and useful descriptions. This work was general enough to be useful into a many-headed future. I also learnt to make full documentation on our process and decisions, so that future students working on the project could meaningfully engage with our contributions.

3.2

For my co-op I worked at **First Peoples Law**, a firm dedicated to defending and advancing the rights of Indigenous Peoples. We work on many historical cases between Indigenous communities and the government of Canada. Prior my time at the firm, many cases had reused the same archival material as evidence in cases, but a lot of the work to find, digitize, and transcribe this material was repeated. In effort to reduce duplication of research by creating an internal historical cabinet, that is a digital archive, I was hired. 

My first job was to create a digital finding aid for the thousands of entries to the analogue (and historical) ledger of incoming letters to the BC Lands and Works Department. The challenge was to transcribe various handwritten text from the 1860s onward, and only copy out entries that would potentially be potentially useful for our history team. I used excel to organize different metadata elements such as ledger, date, sender, topic, which proved to not be obvious as over the years and scribes, these details shifted (e.g. date letter was sent or received). I also had to make choices on what would be most useful when dealing with (expanding) historical abbreviations, errors, and other inconsistencies. I made close notes of my decisions (as I had learnt from the MRCP) and left these in a final README of my time on this project (which also included my evolving filter criteria for what was relevant to the firm). Here I was considering my audience as subject experts, such as the researchers on the history team and future co-op hires, as well as lawyers or managers, who might not have as much contexts.

Another of my contributions on this particular project was taking on a side project to explore and recommend handwritten text recognition (HTR) programs to facilitate transcription and search with AI tools. For this I had to have a high overview of the twenty different folders for the original ledgers, their handwriting and number of pages. For this I standardized the file naming conventions, and organized a database with this information along with a concordance between two different scan versions. HTR would not be quite as good as a dedicated co-op student transcription, but might be good enough for the purposes of searching, considering there are advanced “fuzzy” search methods which I was researching concurrently. HTR and advanced searching were additional tools that I quickly became familiar with to organized and manage large quantities of text, which increased our teams access and use for quick searches. My work on this greatly 

3.3 

The final project which developed my information organization and management skills was **digitizing an archival scrapbook for Xwi7xwa**. Two other colleagues at the iSchool and I managed the digitization workflow from project planning to setting up an online content management system to host the digitized collection with attendant metadata.

Important aspects included developing our modified metadata schema. Xwi7xwa archives uses ISAD(G) (General International Standard Archival Description) but had given us free reign to develop our own. Meanwhile, the two CMS servers our class was using were based on Dublin Core (for CONTENTdm) and MODS (Metadata Object Description Schema, for Arca’s Islandora). Through discussion, we determined we wanted to honour ISAD(G), but had more specific information that we felt would be useful to include to improve accessibility. Thus we wrote up a schema based mostly on Dublin Core, but making the relevant ISAD(G) elements required. My contribution was creating are standards table with examples from our collection in our project proposal. I also translated our schema from Dubin Core to MODS, looking at industry standards documentation and the needs of our collection and platform. In addition, I persuaded our group that it was important to highlight in the metadata the subjects of the material, Indigenous organizers, demonstrators, and advocates, that could easily be lost from site in standard schemas as they were neither authors or official contributors.

The scrapbook project gave me the chance to put into practice some of the information organizing skills I had acquired previously, in a way that was more meaningful to Indigenous activism. Working with the same material over two CMS platforms also provided a terrific sandbox to see the benefits and limitations of different servers, while allowing me to hone skills in translation and flexibility in how our material was organized and transferred.
