---
layout: post
title: "PLO5 Thou shalt question power, privilege, and the stories systems tell"
author: "Sim"
categories: plos
tags: [documentation,sample]
image: five.jpg
---

## PLO5

> Reflect in an informed and critical manner on information infrastructures and practices, acknowledging power and privilege, the ongoing influence of colonization, and the value of diverse worldviews

While I touch on many class projects, the main three “artifacts” will be the following (bolded in the body). 

## 1. Intellectual Freedom scenario assignment
## 2. Indigenous Initiatives assignmentMMIWG2S+ assignment
## 3. Climate Crisis assignment

I hope to continue working towards political commitments in my information work. Power—how it is accumulated, reified, and reproduced—has been an ongoing engagement. More than the technical skills employed or tools used, the through line in my work, motivation, and aspirations is in critically and politically engaging with power and playing some little part in redistributing that privilege. I am immensely privileged in so many of my intersections of identity and so this has just as much been a learning about my blind spots and biases—it’s a lifelong learning.

Let me begin my narrative sketch with medieval studies—while my undergraduate work took close looks at text and asked tough questions, it was dead and academically safe. Fast forward from Gutenberg’s press to the information revolution and an upcoming Master’s—I had a year off and felt like I had enough time to finally sit down with some contemporary Indigenous theorists and learn about more recent history. I was blown away by Shawn Wilson’s *Research is Ceremony*—approaching life in its entirety as ritual, and holding knowledge as a sacred relation. In fact, a whole cosmology of relationality, where learning about someone was a growing closer—whether knowledge, earth, universe, or others. And there was an accountability in that.

I then jumped into LIBR569S (Climate Justice) where Lisa Nathan offered a thoughtful and creative way to explore the eco-political implications of information professions from archiving ice cores, how to talk in human ways about the climate crisis, how Indigenous folks have already lived through an apocalypse, how carceral geography was an ecological struggle, and what hope myriadly is. I did a final project interrogating the **future of emotions** as externalized holdings of a library/museum-like centre might hold space for affects of the Anthropocene like climate anxiety or solastalgia. It was a lot, but it gave me a cared-for place to see that there was a LOT going on, but there was also so many “folks” in our profession who cared deeply—we’d be in good company. (Lisa returns to concepts that I’ve also now continually return to, Ruth Wilson Gilmore’s “where life is precious, life is precious” (about the presence of abolition), Alexis Shotwell’s “against purity” (on doing good in a compromising world), and Fobazi Ettarh’s “vocational awe” (on noble ideals that reproduce capitalism). The following term there’d be three intense courses.

<object data="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdfs/emotion-librarian.pdf" width="700" height="700" type='application/pdf'></object>

Cameron Pierson hosted our rigorous Intellectual Freedom seminar. While we looked at a lot of policy documentation that gave helpful guidelines in navigating book challenges (I wrote a blog post on a racist challenge to a children’s book on the Wampanoag) and copyright law (I ran a seminar on seminar that, in part, looked at the Euro-American IP regime and how Indigenous Peoples tend to understand information as caught up in with there very sense of self—I have an hour I could say on this). The toughest challenge came from **our group project scenario** where an Indigenous women challenged our choice of four classic children’s books in our hypothetical small Canadian town school library—that were offensively racist. The freedom of speech tradition and all the guidelines urged us to keep the books because (in short) overall they were fine and met policy. But wait a second—shouldn’t we wonder why the middle class reading and learning tradition is so embedded in our culture? —I’m still not sure precisely how to navigate this situation. Can new books with better representation overcome the heritage of white supremacy in books and the idea of IF? How do we best balance protecting IF as an institution when it rubs up against another group’s disproportionate vulnerability to premature death! Man, that class had so much—radical empathy, trauma-informed care, cultural humility, and no-neutrality librarianship.

<object data="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdfs/school-challenge.pdf" width="700" height="700" type='application/pdf'></object>
*Copyright GF, CW, & SF*

I had a lot of questions so in Research Methods I was exploring how to evaluate implementing hən̓q̓əmin̓əm̓-language material and training at UBC’s libraries, as while as having a dedicated space at the Indigenous Initiatives course. The greatest take-away was how our group project implemented relationality (as Prof. Kristin Kozar shared with us) in our process. On paper we were researching and developing a set of questions (or provocations) for memory institutions working with the **legacies of MMIWG2S+**. Our workflow, however, asked us to slow down, share where each of us was coming from to have gathered here (acknowledging place), were intentional about caring for each other while working on such a heavy theme. We shared our work with our class through a dinner table conversation between the four of us—something we had learned from two Musqueam thinkers.

<object data="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdfs/mmiwg.pdf" width="700" height="700" type='application/pdf'></object>
*Copyright RBL, JD, RH, & SF*

The final parallel (yet inextricably intertwined with the other courses this term) was the opportunity to serve with the Musqueam Resource Curation Project (MRCP) which is gathering a repository of resources UBC holds on xʷməθkʷəy̓əm. as a part of the university’s effort in taking responsibility in a more collaborative relationship with the People on whose unceded land it resides. My work included describing and organizing items in an accessible and useful way for researchers and xʷməθkʷəy̓əm community members (we created new metadata elements more reflective of community needs based on conversations). Like many moments throughout my life, I am continually made (a little more) aware of how little I know or understand. I grew up in Vancouver, but I knew embarrassingly-little about the struggles and hopes of the xʷməθkʷəy̓əm, Sḵwx̱wú7mesh Úxwumixw, and səlilwətaɬ. The weekly meetings with key stakeholders and the two other students involved was also quite impactful in learning working together and taking initiative in a real-world project that was constantly evolving. (I continued to engage by taking a hən̓q̓əmin̓əm̓ course afterwards). After the term I wrote this reflection:

> Perhaps most importantly, my continuing work with the MRCP has been personally transformative as I learn cultural humility and reflect on my relationship with the land I grew up with and the xʷməθkʷəy̓əm stewardship that I have benefited enormously from.

That reflection somehow got me a job (isn’t that messed up!) with First Peoples Law as a historical research assistant (which I describe elsewhere), and later I worked on a project for Xwi7xwa Archives. While unsettling my understanding of Indigeneity has been a huge component of my formation during my time at the iSchool, I have also infiltrated the faculty of education and took a course of Social Emotional Learning (SEL) through a critical race theory. My partner and I designed a SEL and Autism workshop for educators, where I did the critical theory research, and Brittney connected that to her own teaching-practice and ability to connect with other teachers—the process opened new perspectives of another related discipline, navigating managing personal coping mechanism vis-à-vis systemic change, the social construction of disability, and how universal design.

And finally for an Information Visualization term project I return to an environmental endeavour. We are creating a science communication style blog on BC’s drastic kelp forest declines and reforestation efforts. For the group project, I conceived seven graphic displays of data outlining factors that decimated the forests, why kelp forests are so important, and an overview of the 258 reforestation attempts (I am fully creating the line graph on predation cycles, and a bubble chart on carbon absorption rates).

Power. Recurring challenges includes feeling paralyzed, both in the sense of I don’t know what to do, as well as I’m privileged, I’ll likely just hurt more people. Navigating the risks of performative allyship (and some appropriation)—after all the courses can tend to a lot of talk and not much real-world action. Different feelings: judgemental, smug, irate, frustrated, angry, hopeful, inspired, self-righteous, overwhelmed, tired, critical, stimulated, overstimulated, exhausted, powerless.

The greatest success is in my own learning, but I hope also that I was able to contribute in small ways to spreading critical takes on imaginative and caring ways to build a world that more of us can thrive in. 

I continue to become aware of my own privilege, what I don’t know I don’t know, some cultural humility, and maybe even some of my power to collaborate on creating more livable futures. I’m not sure what’s next but I hope to see you there.

