---
layout: post
title: "PLO10 Thou shalt advance the field—complaining sufficeth not"
author: "Sim"
categories: plos
tags: [plos]
image: ten.jpg
---

## PLO10

> Contribute to the advancement of the field through informed practice, service, and/or research

I really appreciated the opportunity last term to work on the digitization project for Xwi7xwa that spanned the years 1988-1990. The aspects that I enjoyed working on, and that I felt like brought something new to the discussion on archives and how to think about them and how to create description, were as follows:

Bringing out some of the internal communication strategies from the movement organizing in the late 80s into the metadata process. Organizers spoke of the many different networks and organizations supporting each other and individuals—thus we wanted to highlight these in the subject categories. We were also able to tag all the named individuals, as we felt they were what made up the protest movement, rather than simply privileging the news article authors and photographers.

The scrapbook has a narrow focus on the events surrounding the protests against funding cutbacks, but there are constant allusions to wider political contexts that inform the movement organizers. At the time, events at UBC were creating dialogue on the parallels between Indigenous experiences in Canada, and those of Black folks in Apartheid South Africa; events hosted at Kahnawà:ke Survival School and Nakoda lodge hint at the contemporary Indigenous struggles in community control of schools ('78), the Kanesatake Resistance/Oka Crisis ('90), and Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples ('92 workshop at Nakoda Lodge). We included a full transcript of one newspaper page which, contrary to the scrapbook maker's usual practice, included a seemingly unrelated article—the government of Canada's reaction to the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre—alongside a victory for the Indigenous students. This was very suggestive, and unexplored in traditional description methods. I also identified a singular photo from a music festival in Mount Currie, alluding to the Líl̓wat Nation's ongoing defence of the Stein Valley from logging.

Xwi7xwa library doesn't know who put the scrapbook together (or who cut the binding), or anything else about it, till it was described in 2012. We had fun learning as much as we could with the material we had. I was able to reach out to two organizers and have conversations with them on their visions on the material in the archives. This led to more community-defined description, as well as potentially more material (offered by one of the people reached out to).