---
layout: post
title: "PLO8 Thou shalt research diligently—vibes alone are not enough"
author: "Sim"
categories: plos
tags: [plos]
image: eight.jpg
---

## PLO8

> Design and conduct research and evaluation studies to inform evidence-based decision-making

For the core course on research methodologies, I collaborated with two other students to create a full research proposal on how to better support hən̓q̓əmin̓əm̓ language revitalization efforts at UBC’s libraries. I contributed an annotated bibliography on ten articles on academic libraries efforts thus far towards our group’s literature review (the shared Zotero I set up was essential for this). From the foundation thus created, we developed a hypothetical proposal to learn from Musqueam community members what mattered to them.

Based on the work of Musqueam scholars such as Jordan Wilson and Leona Sparrow, I had learnt about kitchen table conversation methodologies, and we brought this into what traditional research literature would term a focus group. In our design we wanted to forefront the experience of the community and what they valued—both in the process and the outcomes of our research. Thus little things we had learnt from the literature review we conducted went a long way to speak to our audience, such as having tea to share, and allowing open-ended storytelling to speak obliquely to our questions.

We also looked at how past research groups had developed strong relationships with Musqueam and other Indigenous groups, which are over-researched. I thought it was important to have prior, informed, and free consent, and worked to incorporate this into our proposal based on band forms. Based on parallel literature, such as the Research 101: A Manifesto for Ethical Research in the Downtown Eastside, I prioritized suggesting having specific ways to give back to the participants, who often don’t see anything of the research of academics. We included brainstorming UBC Libraries to offer community cards freely to Indigenous folks to access digital content from Musqueam (after all, UBC and Pacific Spirit Park has displaced them), as well as sharing our results at the community meal and speakers’ series “Musqueam 101” for the folks impacted by our research and results.

This project gave me the skills to write research proposals with mixed methodologies, and use research towards improving the lives of those researched, mobilize community-centered research (we had hypothetically been commissioned by Musqueam to do this work), and use research as activism to change the academy and its (UBC’s) relationship with the community that has stewarded the land on which it sits and benefits enormously.
